Update Working with Dependencies -> Enhance new Tutorial (#30218)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/dep-man/basics/variant_aware_resolution.adoc

// Copyright (C) 2023 Gradle, Inc.
//
// Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.;
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[variant_aware_resolution]]
= 7. Variant Aware Dependency Resolution

> In Gradle, the traditional method of sharing artifacts between projects involves the producer defining a configuration, and the consumer explicitly stating which configuration to depend on.
> However, this method isn't ideal when you want to automate the selection of *variants* based on the consumer's needs without specifying a particular configuration.
> 
> Gradle allows for a more dynamic approach called **variant-aware resolution**, where both the producer and consumer define their requirements using **attributes**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Gradle, dependency resolution is often thought of from the standpoint of a *consumer* and a *producer*.

The consumer declares dependencies and performs dependency resolution, while producers satisfy those dependencies by exposing variants.

Gradle's resolution engine follows a dynamic approach to dependency resolution called **variant-aware resolution**, where the consumer defines requirements using **attributes**, which are matched with the attributes declared by the producer.
```

I don't even think we should talk about this "traditional" method. If we want to mention it at the end we can but I would rather not lead users astray with this

Author: Done.

> By doing this, Gradle can automatically select the correct *variant* without the consumer explicitly specifying which one to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variant-aware resolution allows Gradle to automatically select the correct *variant* from a producer without the consumer explicitly specifying which one to use.
```

Author: Done.

For instance, if you're working with different architectures (like `arm64` and `i386`), Gradle can choose the appropriate version of a library (`myLib`) for each architecture:

> 1. The *producer*, `myLib`, sets up configurations (`arm64Jars`, `i386Jars`) with specific *attributes* (e.g., `ArchType.ARM64`, `ArchType.I386`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The *producer*, `myLib`, exposes variants (`arm64Elements`, `i386Elements`) with specific *attributes* (e.g., `ArchType.ARM64`, `ArchType.I386`).
```

Author: Done.

> 2. The *consumer*, `myApp`, specifies the required *attributes* (e.g., `ArchType.ARM64`) in its configuration (`testRuntimeClasspath`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The *consumer*, `myApp`, specifies the required *attributes* (e.g., `ArchType.ARM64`) in its resolvable configuration (`runtimeClasspath`).
```

Author: Done.

> 3. If the *consumer*, `myApp`, needs `arm64` architecture, Gradle will automatically pick the `arm64Jars` *variant* from the `myLib` *producer* and use the corresponding *artifact*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the *consumer*, `myApp`, requires dependencies for the `arm64` architecture, Gradle will automatically pick the `arm64Elements` *variant* from the `myLib` *producer* and use its corresponding *artifact*.
```

Author: Done.

== A coded example

> Consider a Java library where you create a new *variant* called `instrumentedJars` and want to ensure it’s selected for testing:

Reviewer: This doesn't seem like the right example to use. 

I'd prefer we showcase the `platforms/documentation/docs/src/snippets/dependencyManagement/attributeMatching/` snippet. 

While that uses the `java-library` plugin already, I think we can pretty easily modify it to not apply that plugin and showcase a more "custom" scenario

1. *Producer Project*: Creates a specialized `instrumentedJars` *variant* marked with specific attributes.

> 2. *Consumer Project*: Configured to request the `instrumented-jar` *variant* for testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. *Consumer Project*: Configured to request the `instrumented-jar` *attribute* for testing.
```

Author: Done.

> 3. *Compatibility Rule*: Ensures that if the `instrumented-jar` isn’t available, Gradle falls back on the regular `jar`.

Reviewer: Disambiguation/Compatibility rules are an advanced topic IMO. We should probably avoid talking about these here

Author: Removed.

Let's look at the build files of the producer and consumer.

== The producer side

=== 1. Create an instrumented JAR:

> Our Java library has a task called `instrumentedJar` which produces a JAR file with the classifier "instrumented."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our Java library has a task called `instrumentedJar` which produces a JAR file.
```

"Classifier" is a maven term and we should probably avoid it here.

Author: Done.

We expect other projects to consume this JAR file.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/kotlin",files="producer/build.gradle.kts[tags=declare-task]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/groovy",files="producer/build.gradle[tags=declare-task]"]
====

=== 2. Create a custom outgoing configuration:

> We want our instrumented classes to be used when executing tests, so we need to attach proper *attributes* to our *variant*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want our instrumented classes to be used when executing tests, so we need to define proper *attributes* on our *variant*.
```

Author: Done.

We create a new configuration named `instrumentedJars`.
This configuration:

- Can be consumed by other projects.
- Cannot be resolved (i.e., it’s meant to be used as an output, not an input).
- Has specific *attributes*, including `LibraryElements.LIBRARY_ELEMENTS_ATTRIBUTE` set to "instrumented-jar", which explains what the *variant* contains.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/kotlin",files="producer/build.gradle.kts[tags=declare-outgoing-configuration]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/groovy",files="producer/build.gradle[tags=declare-outgoing-configuration]"]
====

=== 3. Attach the Artifact:

The `instrumentedJar` task’s output is added to the `instrumentedJars` configuration as an *artifact*.

> This makes it available for other projects to consume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this variant is included in a dependency graph, this artifact will be resolved during artifact resolution.
```

Author: Done.

include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/groovy",files="consumer/build.gradle[tags=test_dependency]"]
====

At this point, Gradle will still select the default `runtimeElements` *variant* for your dependencies.
This is because the `testRuntimeClasspath` configuration is requesting *artifacts* with the `jar` library elements *attribute*, while the producer defines the `instrumentedJars` *variant* with a different *attribute*.

=== 2. Adjust the requested attributes:

The `testRuntimeClasspath` configuration is modified to ask for "instrumented-jar" versions of the dependencies.
This means that when Gradle resolves dependencies for this configuration, it will prefer JAR files that are marked as "instrumented":

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/kotlin",files="consumer/build.gradle.kts[tags=ask-for-instrumented-classes]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/groovy",files="consumer/build.gradle[tags=ask-for-instrumented-classes]"]
====

> We can look at a report on the consumer side to view exactly what *attributes* of each dependency will be requested:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can look at a report on the consumer side to view exactly which *attributes* of each dependency will be requested:
```

Author: Done.

[source,text]
----
$ .gradle resolvableConfigurations --configuration testRuntimeClasspath

Attributes
    - org.gradle.category            = library
    - org.gradle.dependency.bundling = external
    - org.gradle.jvm.version         = 11
    - org.gradle.libraryelements     = instrumented-jar
    - org.gradle.usage               = java-runtime
----

In this case, we see the `testRuntimeClasspath` configuration requests _instrumented classes_.

> === 3. Handle missing variants with compatibility rules:

Reviewer: Again, this is an advanced topic. I'd vote to omit this here.

Author: Removed.

Since not all dependencies (like `junit`) will provide instrumented classes, you need to define a compatibility rule that allows Gradle to fall back on the regular `jar` if an `instrumented-jar` is not available.

To do this, we need to write a _compatibility rule_:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/kotlin",files="consumer/build.gradle.kts[tags=compatibility-rule]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/modelingFeatures-crossProjectPublications-advanced/groovy",files="consumer/build.gradle[tags=compatibility-rule]"]
====

> Which we need to declare on the attributes schema:

Reviewer: It might be worth pulling this up towards the top. We should first "define" the attribute on the attribute schema, then use that attribute on variants.

Author: Removing the compatibility rule since its too advanced.
